.ve-media https://iiif.archivelab.org/iiif/Spiraea_prunifolia_Sieb.andZucc./manifest.json right

There are over 340,000 known flowering plant species, a lot to keep track of. With many species threatened by environmental change, it’s particularly important to document what is growing where. This is one of the functions of ==herbarium=={Q181916} specimens, preserved plants often in the form of pressed cuttings that have been collected since the 16th century. The technique now used is very similar to that originally employed:  a cutting is carefully spread out on absorbent paper, covered by another sheet, and pressed between boards so the plant doesn't curl up as it dries. A specimen can then last indefinitely if kept from the three most common threats: water, fire, and insects. Five examples are presented to tell the history of plant collecting and why herbaria are becoming more important in a number of ways.

### A 16th-century Tomato

.ve-media wc:Naturalis_Biodiversity_Center_-Solanumlycopersicum_var._lycopersicum_-oldtomatoherbariumsheet.jpg right

In the past, herbarium sheets were often bound into book form to preserve them. This Italian specimen from about 1558 is typical of collecting’s early years when little more than a plant’s name was given, in this case in Latin, and often two or more species were attached to a page. To the right is a ==tomato=={Q23501} plant, an early example of this Latin American species grown and preserved in Europe. A small sample of this specimen was used to sequence its DNA and the plant was found to be a domesticated variety. Preserved plants like this reveal that a number of Latin American and Asian species were found in many European countries early in the history of European exploration.  

### Darlingtonia

From the 16th century on, plant collectors were dispatched around the world in search of new species. Since it was difficult to transport live plants or even seeds on long ocean voyages, specimens and illustrations were sent to botanists for study. The US sponsored ==Wilkes Expedition=={Q119129} (1838-1842) brought back 50,000 plant specimens, including many new species. The New York botanist ==John Torrey=={Q1346660} studied those collected in what is now Oregon and California. Among them were pitcher plant specimens: its stems and distinctive cylindrical leaves. However, it was impossible to identify or describe the species because there were no flowers, often the most distinctive part of a plant.  

A few years later another collector who had visited the same area arrived at Torrey’s door with a package of specimens. Opening it immediately, he realized it contained specimens of the same pitcher plant, but in flower. He sent a portion of this precious material to a botanical illustrator who returned a sketch giving dimensionality to the flattened plant. The drawing does a masterful job of giving form to the flattened specimen, and the photograph reveals what is lost when a plant is dried. Torrey named it ==*Darlingtonia californica*=={Q1138945} after his friend ==William Darlington=={Q8007604} of Pennsylvania with whom he traded specimens. It was often through such connections that plants received their names. The specimen shown here is called the type specimen because it is the one that Torrey described in his publication. Types are considered particularly important in referencing species’ traits.  

### Lewis and Clark

Specimens can also hold stories about what happened to them after collection. After ==President Thomas Jefferson=={Q11812} appointed ==Meriwether Lewis=={Q313492} and ==William Clark=={Q355348} to lead an expedition into the newly acquired ==Louisiana Purchase=={Q193155} territory, Lewis was tutored in plant identification and collection by ==Benjamin Barton=={Q276825}, a leading Philadelphia botanist. Some of Lewis’s specimens were lost in transit, a common problem for expeditions. However, many did reach Barton who then asked botanist ==Frederick Pursh=={Q67353} to study them. Pursh became dissatisfied with his compensation and left with some of the specimens, eventually sailing to England where he published descriptions of expedition plants. He then sold the specimens to British botanist ==Aylmer Bourke Lambert=={Q374894} whose collection was auctioned after his death. The Lewis material was bought by an American botanist who donated them to the ==Academy of Natural Sciences=={Q2822400} in Philadelphia. 

The remainder of the collection was left unstudied in Philadelphia’s ==American Philosophical Society=={Q466089} until the late 19th century when it were reunited at ANS with the Lambert material, 227 sheets in all.  Some of this history can be read on the specimens. A specimen of the ==Oregon grape=={Q158303} is one that Pursh took to England and has the stamp of the Lambert Herbarium. The ==long-leaved sage=={Q15470605} specimen remained in Philadelphia and has the original Lewis label of colored blotting paper he used to press specimens; only 34 of these still exist. Pursh had rewritten many of Lewis’s labels and then disposed of the originals, a rather common practice at the time. More recent slips note botanists who have examined the specimens and confirmed identifications. Today, every bit of information on a specimen is retained in case it might be valuable in the future.

These specimens provide microhistories of who has researched them over more than two centuries. And when they are studied along with the expedition’s journals and other documentation, they provide a fuller picture of where and when they were collected and what happened to them since. These plants are historical documents as much as they are scientific ones.  

### Richard Spruce

The British botanist ==Richard Spruce=={Q1349394} took notes on the indigenous uses for the plants he collected and in some cases these are still affixed to specimens as with this ==Paricá tree=={Q150584} cutting gathered in the ==Amazon region=={Q2841453} near the ==Rio Negro=={Q118771} in 1850. In the note, Spruce tells of what he  learned about the tree’s seeds from indigenous guides who traveled with him. The seeds were dried, ground to a powder, which was then inhaled through a narrow two-part pipe made by halving a bone from a birds leg.  The effect of inhalation was an altered state of conscious.  

The history of plant collecting is closely tied to the history of colonization around the world. Nations like Britain had powerful navies that sailed around the world often with naturalists to survey the resources of lands they visited. Because they knew little about these areas, collectors had to rely on indigenous people to find and identify plants and their uses. When reporting on their travels, collectors sometimes ignored or minimized these contributions. In other cases, this information was lost in transit or discarded by those who didn’t consider it important. In this way the indigenous contribution to plant discovery was erased. This is not the case here, where Spruce gave detailed information and acknowledged that it came from his guides.

### Today’s Labels

A label with at least the plant’s name identifies the herbarium specimen. Early labels usually contained little more than the name, often in Latin and a ==vernacular=={Q1036511} language. As time went on, botanists realized that different species grew in different types of habitats so it was useful to record where the plant was found and also when it was collected and by whom. Now it is standard to add information on flower color or form that might be lost in the pressed specimen, as well as geographic coordinates for precise location, a short description of the habitat, and other species present.  

This additional data makes specimens useful in research beyond plant identification. ==Geographic coordinates=={Q106264295} are employed in mapping a species’ range and in helping to predict the effects of global warming.  Since specimens have been collected for centuries, particularly intensively in the last two; they provide evidence of changes in flowering and fruiting times due to climate change. Over the past decade, there have been massive efforts to digitize specimen data to make them available to researchers around the world in order to study environmental changes and also to document the earth’s biodiversity as it comes under increasing threat.
  
